The President:
Over the better part
of the past year,
a great debate has taken
place in Washington and across
America, about how to reform our
health care system to provide
security for people
with insurance,
coverage for those
without insurance,
and lower costs for everyone.
From the halls of Congress to
the homes of ordinary Americans,
this debate has helped us to
forge consensus and find common ground.
That's a good thing.
That's what America's all about.
Now, as the debate
draws to a close,
we can point to a broad and
growing coalition of doctors and
nurses, workers and businesses,
hospitals and even drug
companies -- folks who
represent different parties and
perspectives, including leading Democrats and many leading
Republicans -- who recognize
the urgency of action.
Just this week, the Senate
Finance Committee approved a
reform proposal that has both
Democratic and Republican support.
For the first time ever, all
five committees in Congress
responsible for health reform
have passed a version of legislation.
As I speak to you today, we are
closer to reforming the health
care system than we have
ever been in history.
But this is not the time to
pat ourselves on the back.
This is not the time
to grow complacent.
There are still significant
details and disagreements to be
worked out in the coming weeks.
And there are still those who
would try to kill reform at any cost.
The history is clear: for
decades rising health care costs
have unleashed havoc on
families, businesses,
and the economy.
And for decades, whenever we
have tried to reform the system,
the insurance companies have
done everything in their
considerable power to stop us.
We know that this inaction
has carried a terrible toll.
In the past decade,
premiums have doubled.
Over the past few years, total
out of pocket costs for people
with insurance rose by a third.
And we know that if we
do not reform the system,
this will only be a preview
of coming attractions.
A new report for the
Business Roundtable --
a non-partisan group that
represents the CEOs of major
companies -- found that
without significant reform,
health care costs for these
employers and their employees
will well more than double
again over the next decade.
The cost per person for health
insurance will rise by about $18,000.
That's a huge amount of money.
That's going to mean
lower salaries and higher
unemployment, lower profits
and higher rolls of uninsured.
It's no exaggeration to
say, that unless we act,
these costs will
devastate the US economy.
This is the unsustainable
path we're on,
and it's the path the
insurers want to keep us on.
In fact, the insurance industry
is rolling out the big guns and
breaking out their
massive war chest --
to marshal their forces for one
last fight to save the status quo.
They're filling the airwaves
with deceptive and dishonest ads.
They're flooding Capitol Hill
with lobbyists and campaign contributions.
And they're funding studies
designed to mislead the American people.
Of course, like clockwork, we've
seen folks on cable television
who know better, waving these
industry-funded studies in the air.
We've seen industry insiders
-- and their apologists --
citing these studies as proof
of claims that just aren't true.
They'll claim the premiums
will go up under reform;
but they know that the
non-partisan Congressional
Budget Office found that reforms
will lower premiums in a new
insurance exchange while
offering consumer protections
that will limit out-of-pocket
costs and prevent discrimination
based on pre-existing
conditions.
They'll claim that you'll have
to pay more out of pocket;
but they know that this is
based on a study that willfully
ignores whole
sections of the bill,
including tax credits and
cost savings that will greatly
benefit middle class families.
Even the authors of one of
these studies have now admitted
publicly that the insurance
companies actually asked them to
do an incomplete job.
It's smoke and mirrors.
It's bogus.
And it's all too familiar.
Every time we get close
to passing reform,
the insurance companies produce
these phony studies as a
prescription and say,
"Take one of these,
and call us in a decade."
Well, not this time.
The fact is, the insurance
industry is making this
last-ditch effort to stop reform
even as costs continue to rise
and our health care dollars
continue to be poured into their
profits, bonuses, and
administrative costs that do
nothing to make us healthy -- that often actually go toward
figuring out how to
avoid covering people.
And they're earning these
profits and bonuses while
enjoying a privileged exception
from our anti-trust laws,
a matter that Congress
is rightfully reviewing.
Now, I welcome a good debate.
I welcome the chance to defend
our proposals and to test our
ideas in the fires
of this democracy.
But what I will not abide are
those who would bend the truth
-- or break it -- to score political points and stop our
progress as a country.
And what we all must oppose are
the same old cynical Washington
games that have been played for
decades even as our problems
have grown and our
challenges have mounted.
Last November, the American
people went to the polls in
historic numbers
and demanded change.
They wanted a change
in our policies;
but they also sought a change
in our politics: a politics that
too often has fallen prey to the lobbyists and special interests;
that's fostered division and sustained the status quo.
Passing health insurance
reform is a great test of this proposition.
Yes, it will make a profound and
positive difference in the lives
of the American people.
But it also now represents
something more: whether or not
we as a nation are capable
of tackling our toughest
challenges, if we can serve the
national interest despite the
unrelenting efforts of
the special interests;
if we can still do
big things in America.
I believe we can.
I believe we will.
And I urge every member of
Congress to stand against the
power plays and
political ploys --
and to stand up on behalf the
American people who sent us to
Washington to do their business.
Thanks.